 In this age of viruses and hackers, of electronic eavesdropping and electronic fraud, security is paramount . This text provides a practical survey of both the principles and practice of cryptography and network security . The practice of network security is explored via the practice of implementing cryptographic technology .  The author and publisher make no warranty of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard to these programs or the contents of this book . Pearson Education is a trademark of Pearson Education, Inc.  The Fourth Edition of Information Technology Security is published in 1998 . The book has been updated and revised since it was published three years ago . It includes programming projects that can be implemented in suitable language on any platform .  The two most widely used general-purpose public-key algorithms are RSA and elliptic curve . The reader may wish to skip the material on elliptic-curve cryptography in Chapter 10, at least on a first reading . There are a number of resources available on the Internet to support this  Security involving communications and networks is not as simple as it might first appear to the novice . The procedures used to provide particular security services are often counterintuitive . The Internet Architecture Board issued a report in 1994 titled "Security in the Internet Architecture"  The X800 X.800 defines a security service as a service provided by a protocol layer of communicating open systems . There is no universal agreement about many terms used in the security literature .  X.800 treats availability as a property to be associated with various various security services . Integrity can apply to a stream of messages, a single message, or selected fields within a message . The most useful and straightforward approach is total stream protection . The other aspect of confidentiality is the protection of traffic  A general model of security-related situations is illustrated by Figure 1.6, which reflects a concern for protecting an information-related system from unwanted access . The security mechanisms needed to cope with unwanted access fall into two broad categories . The gatekeeper function is designed to deny access to all but  Symmetric encryption transforms plaintext into ciphertext using secret key and encryption algorithm . Rotor machines are sophisticated precomputer-hardware devices that use substitution techniques . Steganography is a technique for hiding a secret message within a larger one in such a way that others cannot discern the presence  Table 2.1 summarizes the various types of cryptanalytic attacks, based on the amount of information known to the cryptanalyst . The most difficult problem is when all that is available is the ciphertext only . The ciphertext-only attack is the easiest to defend against because the opponent  The language of the plaintext is known and easily recognizable . There are only 25 possible keys to try . A brute-force cryptanalysis can be carried out using a large number of keys . The key space can be increased by allowing an arbitrary substitution cipher space .  The Playfair cipher is a great advance over simple monoalphabetic ciphers . It was used as the standard field system by the British Army in World War I. It still enjoyed considerable use by the U.S. Army and other Allied forces during World War II . Figure 2.  Vigenère cipher is vulnerable to cryptanalysis . Keyword is concatenated with the plaintext itself to provide a running key . Key word is as long as the message itself . Key is encrypted with key letter e, encrypted using key letter p and encrypted with letter t .  The transposition cipher can be made significantly more secure by performing more than one stage of transposition . The result is a more complex permutation that is not easily reconstructed . The most important application of the principle of multiple stages of encryption was a class of systems known as rotor machines .  The Web site includes information and links to sites concerned with classical cryptographers . It includes useful Web sites such as Simon Singh's Web site and Simon's Crypto Corner .  Deciphering the message YITJP GWJOW FAQTQ using the Hill cipher with the inverse key . Decrypt the message "meet me at the usual place at ten.rather than eight oclock" Encrypt the word "explanation" using the Vigenère  A block cipher operates on a plaintext block of n bits to produce a                ciphertext block . For the encryption to be reversible (i.e., for decryption to be possible), each must produce a unique ciphertext . The ideal block cipher allows for the maximum number of possible  The Feistel cipher is the cornerstone of modern block cipher design . It uses a complex substitution algorithm to make the relationship between the statistics of the ciphertext and the value of the encryption key as complex as possible .  DES encryption has been the subject of much controversy concerning how secure it is . DES DES encryption was developed by IBM in the late 1960s . DES has flourished and is widely used, especially in financial applications . We study the encryption of DES in Chapter 6 .  A 64-bit key is used as input to the algorithm . The bits of the key are numbered from 1-through 64; every eighth bit is ignored . The key is first subjected to a permutation by a table labeled Permuted Choice One . The resulting 56-bit, 56  Differential cryptanalysis is a powerful tool, but it does not do very well against DES . The rationale behind the attack is to observe the behavior of pairs of text blocks evolving along each round of the cipher . The attack can successfully cryptanalyze DES with an effort on the order of 247  The cryptographic strength of a Feistel cipher derives from three aspects of the design: the number of rounds, the function F, and the key schedule algorithm . These criteria are intended to increase the diffusion of the algorithm .  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems with Encryption Standard (DES) Explain how, with access to the encryption oracle, you can decrypt c and determine mutable ciphertext using just a single oracle query .  Using S-DES, decrypt the string (10100010) using the key(0111111101) by hand . Show intermediate results after each function (IP, Fk, SW, IP-1) Then decode the first 4 bits of the plaintext string to a letter and  A field is a set in which we can do addition, subtraction, and division without leaving the set . Figure 4.1 summarizes the axioms that define groups, rings, and fields . Division is defined with the following rule: a/b = a(b-1)  Two integers are relatively prime if their only common positive integer factor is 1 . Equation (4.3) is consistent with the existence of a multiplicative inverse . The Euclidean Algorithm determines the greatest common divisor of two positive integers .  The Euclidean algorithm correctly returns gcd(m, b) to a finite field of order, where p is prime . We have shown that the elements of GF(p) are the integers {0, 1, 1......... ...... and that the binary operations + and  The Euclidean algorithm for polynomials can be stated as follows as follows: the degree of a(x) is greater than that of b(x). Polynomial division is not allowed unless the coefficients are elements of a field . In Section 4.4, we looked  The extended Euclidean algorithm can be adapted to find the multiplicative inverse of a polynomial . Table 4.6.7 shows the calculation of (x7 + x + 1) mod (x8 + x4 + x3 + x 3 + x1) mod .  PascGalois Project: Contains a clever set of examples to aid in giving students a visual understanding of key concepts in abstract algebra .  The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) was published by NIST(National Institute of Standards and Technology) in 2001 . The structure of AES is very complex and cannot be explained as easily as RSA and similar algorithms . NIST published a final standard in November 2001 for the new Advanced Enc  Rijndael performs encryption and decryption very well on a variety of platforms, including 8-bit and 64-bit platforms, and DSPs . Hardware implementations can be optimized for speed or for size, but doubling the area used in a hardware device typically more than doubles the cost  The structure of a full encryption round is quite simple . For both encryption and decryption, the cipher begins with an AddRoundKey stage . The other three stages together provide confusion, diffusion, nonlinearity, but by themselves would provide no security because they do not use the key . The  The MixColumns transformation on a single column j(0  j  3) of State can be expressed as a function of all four bytes in that column . The transformation can be defined by the following matrix multiplication on State . In this case, the individual additions and multiplications are performed  An encryption round has the structure SubBytes, ShiftRows, InvSubBytes, AddRoundKey, InvMixColumns . The decryption algorithm has the same structure as the encryption algorithm . To achieve this equivalence, a change in key schedule is needed .  The AES document defines polynomial arithmetic for polynomials of 3 or less with coefficients in GF(28) Addition and multiplication of coefficients occurred within the field Zp; that is, addition and multiplication were performed modulop . The inverse of the MixColumns step is  The S-AES Encryption and Decryption algorithm is defined as the inverse nibble substitution function, inverse shift row (ISR), and inverse mix column (IMC) We look at the individual functions that are part of the encryption algorithm .  A mode of operation is a technique for enhancing the effectiveness of a cryptographic algorithm or adapting the algorithm for an application, such as applying a block-cipher to a sequence of data blocks or a data stream . The chapter next turns to the subject of block cipher modes of operation . The most  A number of Internet-based applications have adopted three-key 3DES, including PGP and S/MIME, both discussed in Chapter 15 . NIST has expanded the list of recommended modes to five in Special Publication 800-38A. These modes are intended for use with any symm  The input to the encryption function is a .b-bit shift register that is initially set to some initialization vector (IV) The leftmost (most significant) s bits of the encryption . are XORed with the first segment of plaintext P1 to produce the first unit of cipher  The RC4 algorithm was designed in 1987 by Ron Rivest for RSA Security . It is a variable key-size stream cipher with byte-oriented operations . Analysis shows that the period of the cipher is likely to be greater than 10100 [ROBS95a] Eight to 16 machine operations  An algorithm based on RC4 has a secret internal state which is a permutation of all the possible values of the vector S and the two indices i and j.e . An adversary observes several values (v1 || C1), (v2 || C2), ... transmitted between Alice  An eavesdropper can monitor LAN traffic on the LAN and capture traffic desired on the basis of source and destination addresses . An intruder can tap into each wire to determine which are used for data transmission . An attack can take place on any of the communications links . Encryption is the most powerful  The encryption function is performed at the lowest practical level of the communications hierarchy . The only place to achieve end-to-end encryption is at the application layer . With this arrangement, it might be desirable to off-load the encryption function to some sort of front-end processor .  The strength of any cryptographic system rests with the key distribution technique, a term that refers to delivering a key to two parties who wish to exchange data, without allowing others to see the key . The scale of the problem depends on the number of communicating pairs that must be supported . Figure 7.  A Transparent Key Control Scheme (Figure 7.10) is useful for providing end-to-end encryption at a network or transport level in a way that is transparent to the end users . The approach assumes that communication makes use of a connection-oriented protocol, such as TCP . The  The use of a sequence of numbers that appear random often occurs in the design of algorithms related to cryptography . The most widely used technique for pseudorandom number generation is the first proposed by Lehmermer [LEHM51]  A number of applications employ this technique, including financial security applications and PGP . The technique involves a 112-bit key and three EDE-encryptions for a total of nine DES encryptions . A protected master key protects the generated session keys .  LavaRnd is an open source project that uses a chaotic source to generate truly random numbers . List ways in which secret keys can be distributed to twocommunicating parties . Discuss security requirements and implications of the two encryption methods .  Part Two: Public-Key Encryption and Hash Functions . Part Three: Key Management, Hash Functions, Message Authentication and Hash Algorithms . Part Two looks at the design of digital signatures .  Two theorems that play important roles in public-key cryptography are Fermat's and Euler's Theorems . The greatest common divisor of integers a and b, expressed gcd(a, b), is an integer c that divides both a and a without remainder .  The Miller-Rabin algorithm can determine with a high degree of confidence whether or not an integer is prime . It can be shown [KNUT98] that given an odd number n that is not prime and a randomly chosen integer, a with 1 < a < n 1, a  The logarithms are the modularinversearithmetic function of exponentiation . The digitalgorithm (DSA) provides a brief overview of discrete logariths . The properties of logarathms include the properties of ordinary logarities .  Use Fermat's Theorem to find a number a between 0 and 72 with a congruent to 9794 modulo 73 . Prove that gcd(n,n +1) = 1 for two consecutive integers n and n +1?  Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman first publicly introduced the concepts of public-key cryptography in 1976 . Public-Key Cryptosystems evolved from an attempt to attack two of the most difficult problems associated with symmetric encryption . Diffie: "What good would it do after all to  Public-key cryptosystems are characterized by the use of a cryptographic algorithm with two keys, one held private and one available publicly . The encryption process depicted in Figure 9.1b and 9.3 does not provide confidentiality . It is, however, possible to provide both the authentication  The Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) scheme has since reigned supreme as the most widely accepted and implemented approach to public-key encryption . We examine RSA in this section in some detail, beginning with an explanation of the algorithm .  Primes must be chosen from a sufficiently large set (i.e., p and q must be large numbers) The method used for finding large primes is efficient, so some other means of tackling the problem is needed .  The attack proceeds bit-by-bit starting with the modular exponentiation algorithm of Figure 9.7 . Paul Kocher demonstrated that a snooper can determine a private key by keeping track of how long a computer takes to decipher messages . Timing attacks are applicable not just to RSA  What are three broad categories of applications of public-key cryptosystems? What is a one-way function? Describe in general terms an efficient procedure for picking a prime number . Describe the use of this set of tables to perform encryption and decryption between two users .  The girl's father refuses to allow his daughter to marry the young man, thus making them both                unhappy . Watson was visibly unsympathetic with the idea that the sympathetic young man has to lose his love . Watson: "I don't see how you can help him."  A problem that can be solved in polynomial time is considered feasible, but anything worse than polyncular time, especially exponential time, is considered infeasible . The complexity of cryptanalysis of an encryption algorithm can be characterized equally well in terms of the number of possible keys or the  Public-key certificates can be used by participants to exchange keys without contacting a public-key authority . An alternative approach, first suggested by Kohnfelder [KOHN78] uses certificates that are signed by a trusted third party . A certificate scheme is illustrated in Figure 10.4.  The first published public-key algorithm appeared in the seminal seminal paper by Diffie and Hellman . The algorithm itself is limited to the exchange of secret values . The Diffie-Hellman algorithm depends for its effectiveness on the difficulty of computing discrete logarithms .  An elliptic curve is defined by an equation in two variables, with the variables and coefficients taking on values in real numbers . Cryptanalysis involves determining k given a and (a x k), k, k, a x k . The operation over elliptic curves, called addition, is used  For elliptic curves over GF(2m) we use a cubic equation in which the variables and coefficients all take on values in GF(1m) The number of points in Ep(a, b) is approximately equal to the number of elements in Zp, namely p elements .  Table 10.3 compares various algorithms by showing comparable key sizes in terms of computational effort for cryptanalysis . Table shows that ECC can be used for ECC with a shorter key length than a comparably secure RSA . Table: Comparable Key Sizes in Terms of Computational Effort  The most confusing area of network security is that of message authentication and the related topic of digital signatures . The two most common cryptographic techniques for message authentication are a message authentication code and a secure hash function . The attacks and countermeasures become so convoluted that they begin to remind one of the astronomers of  In general, we require that only a small subset of all possible bit patterns be considered legitimate plaintext . For example, suppose that only one bit pattern in 106 is legitimate, then the probability that any randomly chosen bit pattern, treated as ciphertext, will be accepted as authentic plaintext is  Message Authentication Code is a many-to-one function . It is less vulnerable to being broken than symmetric encryption . Messages as a whole are transmitted in the clear . Messages are broadcast to a number of destinations, such as military control centers .  A MAC, also known as a cryptographic checksum, is generated by a function C of the form MAC = C(K, M) where M is a variable-length message, K is a secret key shared only by sender and receiver . The receiver authenticates that message by computing the  The first three properties are requirements for the practical application of a hash function to message authentication . The fourth property, the one-way property, states that it is easy to generate a code given a message but virtually impossible to do so . The sixth property refers to how resistant the hash function is  The strength of a hash function against brute-force attacks dependssolely on the length of the hash code produced by the algorithm . We examine two strong hash functions in Chapter 12 .  The attacks that have been mounted on hash functions are rather complex and beyond our scope here . For any hash function there must exist collisions, so it is difficult to generalize about the cryptanalysis of MACs . The attack on f depends on exploiting its internal structure .  The birthday problem can be generalized to the general case of duplications . The probability of no duplicates is simply the fraction of sets that have no duplicate out of all possible sets of values . For k = 100, the probability of at least one duplicate is 0.9999997 .  The SHA-512 algorithm takes as input a message with a maximum length of 2128 bits and produces as output a 512-bit message digest . The input is processed in 1024-bit blocks . A message is padded so that its length is congruent to 896 modulo 1024 [  The general iterated hash structure proposed by Merkle (Figure 11.9) is used in virtually all secure hash functions . However, there are difficulties in designing a truly secure hash function when the compression function is a block cipher . The Whirlpool algorithm takes as input a message with  W defines a 16 x 16 matrix of byte-values, called an S-box (Table 12.3), that contains a permutation of all possible 256 8-bit values . Each individual byte of CState is mapped into a new byte in the following way: The leftmost 4  A hash function can be used as a module in implementing HMAC . The security of HMAC could be retained simply by replacing the embedded hash function with a more secure one (e.g., replacing SHA with Whirlpool)  This article examines the security of SHA-256 through SHA-512 . It also discusses the design of the Whirlpool algorithm that computes a 16-word design .  A digital signature is an authentication mechanism that enables the creator of a message to attach a code that acts as a signature . The signature is formed by taking the hash of the message and encrypting the message with the creator's private key . The most important development from the work on public-key  Table 13.1b shows a scenario that provides the arbitration as before but also assures confidentiality . In this case, X transmits an identifier, a copy of the message encrypted with Kxy, and a signature to A . A then transmits everything that it received from X, plus a  Denning proposes a modification to the Needham/Schroeder protocol that includes the addition of a timestamp to steps 2 and 3 . This new scheme requires reliance on clocks that are synchronized throughout the network . An opponent can intercept a message from the sender and replay it later when the timestamp in  E-mail messages should be encrypted such that the mail-handling system is not in possession of the decryption key . A second requirement is that the recipient of a message will be able to authenticate the sender . We also need to provide some assurance that the message is from the alleged  The structure of the algorithm, as revealed in Figure 13.3, is quite unique . The receiver generates a quantity v that is a function of the public key components, the sender's public key, and the hash code of the incoming message . If this quantity matches the signature of the signature  With DSS, even if the same message is signed twice on two occasions, the signatures will differ . This is not true with DSS signatures, because the value of k is generated for each signature . The proposal is based on the following cryptographic scheme: To sign an n-bit cryptographic  Kerberos was intended to have three components to guard a network's gate: authentication, accounting, and audit . The last two heads were never implemented . Instead of building in elaborate authentication protocols at each server it provides a centralized authentication server whose function is to authenticate users to servers and servers  A new service, TGS, issues tickets to users who have been authenticated to AS . The client requests a ticket-granting ticket on behalf of the user, sending its user's ID and password to the server . The TGS then grants a ticket for the particular service . The  The AS provides both the client and the TGS with a secret piece of information in a secure manner . This is referred to as a session key in Kerberos . Table 14.1a shows the technique for distributing the session key . The client sends a message to the AS requesting access  Kerberos Version 5 is specified in RFC 1510 and provides a number of improvements over version 4 [KOHL94]. Version 5 addresses the limitations of version 4 in environmental shortcomings and technical deficiencies . Version 5 was developed for use within the Athena Project Athena .  Message (1) includes a client request for a ticket-granting ticket . Message (2) includes the session key, identifying information for the client, the requested time values, and flags that reflect the status of this ticket and the requested options . Version 5 includes requested times and options for  X.509 defines a framework for the provision of authentication services by the X.500 directory to its users . Public-key certificates are assumed to be created by some trusted certification authority (CA) Each certificate contains the public key of a user and is signed by a trusted CA . X.  X.509 also includes three other authentication procedures intended for use across a variety of applications . One-Way authentication involves a single transfer of information from one user (A) to another (B), and establishes the identity of A and that the message was intended for B. The two-way  RFC 2822 (Internet Security Glossary) defines public-key-infrastructure (PKI) as the set of hardware, software, people, and procedures needed to create, manage, store, and distribute digital certificates based on asymmetric cryptography . This section describes the PKIX model  The X.509 protocol for three-way authentication in Kerberos has a security flaw . In this appendix, we describe the techniques used to generate encryption keys . In the appendix of this article, we discuss how to generate a key from a key to a password .  PGP is now on an Internet standards track (RFC 3156) PGP still has an aura of an antiestablishmentendeavor . The actual operation of PGP consists of five services: authentication, confidentiality, e-mail compatibility, and segmentation .  PGP's compression algorithm is not deterministic; various implementations achieve different tradeoffs in running speed and compression ratio . The compression algorithm used is ZIP, which is described in appendix 15A . PGP can be configured to convert to radix-64 format only the signature portion of the message  PGP is to assign a key ID to each public key that is, with very high probability, unique within a user ID . This is a sufficient length that the probability of duplicate key-IDs is very small . A message consists of three components: the message component, a signature (optional  PGP is intended for use in a variety of formal and informal environments . No rigid public-key management scheme is set up, such as S/MIME . PGP provides a structure for solving this problem, with several options that may be used .  PGP cannot assume that a key is legitimate simply because it came from a reputable server . The user must declare the key legitimate by signing it or telling PGP that it is willing to trust fully one of the key's key's signatories . A key may be determined to be legitimate because  The bulk of the MIME specification is concerned with the definition of a variety of content types . Table 15.3 lists the content types specified in RFC 2046 . There are seven different major types of content and a total of 15 subtypes .  The base64 transfer encoding, also known as radix-64 encoding, is a common one for encoding arbitrary binary data in such a way as to be vulnerable to the processing by mail transport programs . The quoted-printable transfer encoding is useful when the data consists largely of octets that  S/MIME makes use of a number of new MIME content types, which are shown in Table 15.7.7 . The message to be sent is converted to canonical form and converted to MIME in two parts . The MIME entity is prepared according to the normal rules for  The key-management scheme used by S/MIME is in some ways a hybrid between a strict X.509 certification hierarchy and PGP's web of trust . There are several companies that provide certification authority (CA) services . The most widely used is the VeriSign CA service,  PGP makes use of the cipher feedback (Cipher feedback) mode of CPB: CFB: Ci =E(K[Ci] and PGP uses the cipher block chaining (CBC) mode . The first 16 bits of the message digest in a PGP signature are  PGP uses a complex and powerful scheme for generating random numbers and pseudorandom numbers . PGP generates random numbers from the content and timing of keystrokes . Binary input is processed in blocks of 3 octets, or 24 bits . Each set of 6 bits in a block is mapped  The IAB included authentication and encryption as necessary security features in the next-generation IP, which has been issued as IPv6 . We begin this chapter with an overview of IP security (IPSec) and an introduction to the IPSec architecture . We then look at each of the three functional  In this chapter, the term IP packet refers to either an IPv4 datagram or an IPv6 packet . In any IP packet, the security association is uniquely identified by the Destination Address in the IP4 or IPv6 header and the SPI in the enclosed extension header (AH or ESP)  The Authentication Header provides support for data integrity and authentication of IP packets . It also guards against the replay attack described later in this section . The authentication feature enables an end system or network device to authenticate the user or application .  ESP supports the use of a MAC with a default length of a few bits . The Padding field is used to expand the encryption plaintext to the required length . The Payload Data, Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields are encrypted by the ESP service . ESP is used  The IPSec Architecture document lists four examples of security-related combinations . These are illustrated in Figure 16.9.9 . The order in which authentication and encryption may be applied between a pair of endpoints and the ways of doing so .  Oakley is designed to retain the advantages of Diffie-Hellman while countering its weaknesses . Oakley algorithm is characterized by five important features: It employs a mechanism known as cookies to thwart clogging attacks . It enables the two parties to negotiate a group; this, in essence,  ISAKMP Payload Types: Proposal, Proposal #, Protocol-ID, SPI Size, # of Proposed Transforms, SPI, Notify Message (P) and # of Transforms) Payload includes the Domain of Interpretation (D) and Situation (S)  The Informational Exchange is used for one-way transmittal of information for SA management . IPv6 and IPv4 are covered in more detail in [STAL04]. [CHEN98] provides a good discussion of an IPSec design . Key Terms, Review Questions, and  Figure 16.14a shows the IP header format, which is a minimum of 20 octets, or 160 bits . The field fields are as follows:Version (4 bits): Internet Header Length (IHL) (4-bits): Length of header in 32-bit words . The  The Routing header contains a list of one or more intermediate nodes to be visited on the way to a packet's destination . The Fragment header is used by a source when fragmentation is required . With this option, IPv6 supports packet sizes up to more than 4 billion octets .  A number of approaches to providing Web security are possible . The various approaches are similar in the services they provide and, to some extent, in the mechanisms that they use . These approaches differ with respect to their scope of applicability and their relative location within the TCP/IP protocol stack .  The SSL Record Protocol is one of the three SSL-specific protocols . The Alert Protocol is used to convey SSL-related alerts to the peer-peer-entity . Encryption may not increase the content-length by more than 1024 bytes . The maximum value is 214 + 2048 .  Anonymous Diffie-Hellman: This is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks and misrepresentation attacks . Ephemeral encryption: This technique is used to create temporary (temporary, one-time) secret keys . An anonymous key exchange method is used with no authentication .  Each side performs the Diffie-Hellman calculation to create the shared shared pre_master_secret . Both sides now compute the master_secret as follows: Pre_Master_secret = MD5(pre_master .secret) The result of this is a pseudorandom function .  The Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) is an open encryption and security specification designed to protect credit card transactions on the Internet . The current version of SETv1 emerged from a call for security standards by MasterCard and Visa in February 1996 . SET provides three services: secure communications channel among all parties  The success of SET will depend on the existence of a CA infrastructure available for this purpose . We will then look at some of the cryptographic details that are required for a transaction . The customer places an order and payment are sent to the merchant, along with the order form .  The cardholder generates a one-time symmetric encryption key, Ks. The OI and PI contain order data such as the number and price of items . The transaction ID assigned by the merchant is placed in both the OI (PI) and PI (PIMD) The  Part Four: System Security is a concern of organizations with assets that are controlled by computer systems . The chapter looks at system-level security issues, including the threat of fireruders and viruses . This chapter examines a variety of information accessand service threats presented by hackers .  In 1990 there was a nationwide crackdown on computer hackers, with arrests, criminal charges, several guilty pleas, and confiscation of massive amounts of data and computer equipment [STER92] Many people believedthat the problem had been brought under control . In 1990, many believed that the problem was under  Intrusion detection is based on the assumption that the behavior of an intruder differs from that of a legitimate user in ways that can be quantified . Figure 18.1 suggests, in very abstract terms, the nature of the task of the designer of an intrusion detection system .  Table 18.1 shows various measures considered or tested for the SRI intrusion detection system . Intruder behavior may be characterized with greater confidence by considering such correlations (for example, processor time and resource usage, or login frequency and session elapsed time)  An example of this is a state transition model known as USTAT [ILGU93] USTat deals in general actions rather than the detailed specific actions recorded by UNIX auditing mechanism . The state transition diagram model is easily modified to accommodate newly learned intrusion behaviors . The Base-  A common intrusion language specification, which describes data formats that satisfy the requirements . A framework document, which identifies existing protocols best used for communication between intrusion detection systems and with management systems, including the rationale for those requirements . The password serves to authenticate the ID of the individual logging on to the  The test involved in the neighborhood of 3 million words is under an hour . Even a single hit may be enough to gain a wide range of privileges on a system . The more words needed to be tested for a match, the lower the cost/benefit ratio .  A Bloom filter of order k consists of a set of k independent hash functions . Each function maps a password into a hash table of N bits . If a new password is presented to the checker, it is rejected . But there will also be some "falsepositives" (that is  It was stated that the salt in the UNIX.e encryption scheme increases the difficulty of guessing by a factor of 4096 . But the salt is stored in plaintext in the same type of ciphertext as the corresponding ciphertext password . Therefore, therefore, two characters are known to the attacker  Table 19.1, based principally on [SZOR05, is a guide to Malicious Programs . Malicious software can be divided into two categories: those that need a host program, and those that are independent . The former are programs or fragments that cannot exist independent of programs that  A virus can be prepended or postponed to an executable program, or it can be embedded in some other fashion . Virus can be easily detected because an infected version of a program is longer than the corresponding version of the corresponding program . Virus first seeks out uninfected files and infects them  A new generation of malware arrives via e-mail software to replicate itself across the Internet . E-mail virus has some of the characteristics of a worm, because it requires a human to move it forward . A network worm exhibits the same characteristics as a computer virus .  First-generation antivirus software requires a virus signature to identify a virus . Second-generation scanners use heuristic rules to search for probable virusinfection . Third-generation programs are memory-resident programs that identify virus by actions rather than its structure in an infected program . Fourth-generation packages  Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks present a significant security threat to corporations . DDoS attacks make computer systems inaccessible by flooding servers, networks, or end-users with useless traffic . This section looks at the nature and types of attacks and methods used to recruit hosts for attack  The challenge in coping with DDoS attacks is the sheer number of ways in which they can operate . DDoS countermeasures must evolve with the threat . The book to read is a thorough understanding of viruses and worms .  A firewall defines a single choke point that keeps unauthorized users out of the protected network . It also prohibits potentially vulnerable services from entering or leaving the network . Firewalls have their limitations, including the firewall cannot protect against attacks that bypass the firewall .  Packet filters typically are transparent to users and are very fast . They are vulnerable to attacks and exploits that take advantage of problems within the TCP/IP specification and protocol stack, such as network layer address spoofing .  A bastion host is a system identified by the firewall administrator as a critical strong point in the network's security . It is a platform for an application-level or circuit-level packet-level gateway . The bastion hosts are a trusted system, with only certain services installed on the  An access matrix is usually sparse and is implemented by decomposition in one of two ways . Each entry in the matrix indicates the access rights of that subject for that object . The other axis lists the objects that may be accessed, such as individual data fields . A multilevel secure system must  The Common Criteria (CC) for Information Technologyand Security Evaluation is an international initiative by standards-bodies in a number of countries to develop international standards for specifying security requirements and defining evaluation criteria . The CC defines a common set of potential security requirements for use in evaluation . The term target  Firewall.DI98, [OPPL97], and [BELL94b] are good overview articles on the subject . [WACK02] is an excellent overview of firewall technology and firewall policies . [AUDI04] and [WILS05] provide useful discussions of fire  The Internet Society is responsible for the actual work of standards development and publication . The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) lead the development of new standards and protocols for the Internet . The work of the IETF is divided into eight areas  In this text, I have tried to present the concepts of cryptography and network security as clearly as possible and have provided numerous homework problems to reinforce those concepts . However, manyinstructors will wish to supplement this material with projects . The instructor's supplement includes a set of twelve possible programming projects  A cryptographic technique seeks to obscure the statisticalstructure of the plaintext by spreading out the influence of each individual plaintext digit over many ciphertext digits . A digital signature enables the creator of a message to attach a code that acts as a signature . The greatest common divisor of two  A form of cryptosystem in which encryption and decryption are performed using the same key also known as conventionalencryption . An undocumented entry point into a program, used to grant access without normal methods of access authentication . A computer and operating system that can be verified to implement a given security  The Design of Rijndael: The Wide Trail Strategy Explained. New York, Springer-Verlag, 2002. "A Design Principle for Hash Functions" Damgard, I.aemen, J., and Rijmen, V. Rijman, V., "A  "Foiling the Cracker: A Survey of, and . and . improvements to, Password Security." Proceedings, UNIX Security.Workshop II, August 1990 . "The Use of Encryption in Kerberos for Network.Authentication." in Brazier, F., and  Piattelli-Palmarini: "Probability: Neither Rational nor Probability nor Capricious." "How to Encrypt Properly with RSA." Cryptologia, vol. 15 no. 2, 1991. "The State of Cryptographic Hash Functions." "  The WillIAM STALLINGS Book on Computers and Data Communications is the standard in the field . The book is a comprehensive survey of data communications, networking, computer networks, and network security .